Now, before we move on, let's just discuss Java vs JavaScript.
So right off the bat, just bear in mind, JavaScript and Java are two separate languages. Java is to
JavaScript as ham is to a hamster.
People often confuse Java and JavaScript, and maybe the reason is that JavaScript has actually borrowed
a lot of ideas from Java.
It's actually named after Java.
And if we travel back in time about five years or so, this would be a simple comparison.
It would have just been Java is a general purpose programming language and JavaScript is used to make
websites animated and fun.
But now JavaScript's grown up.
We know that it's exploded, it's gone crazy.
And the comparison between Java and JavaScript is more complicated.
Perhaps the most fundamental difference between Java and JavaScript is that Java is considered a compiled
programming language.
JavaScript and other hand, is considered an interpreted scripting language. And this means that there are differences in
their implementation.
We've been through this.
Remember, Java's compiled into bytecode and it runs on a virtual machine, whereas JavaScript can be
interpreted directly by a browser in the syntax it is written in.
Although, if you look at any JavaScript file sent over the web, you'll see that it's minified, it's condensed
so you can barely read it.
But this is the main difference.
Now, just before we end, let's just state a few more points between JavaScript and Java.
#1 One.
They both run on the browser. JavaScript
we know this already, runs on every single browser out there, and Java applets can also be run on a
browser but they've been declining in popularity for various reasons
some including compatibility and security.
#2 Two. Both can run on a server. Java has long been a major workhorse of the web, with application servers like
WebSphere, JBoss, Apache Tomcat running on a large portion of the web application seen by users today.
And although a while ago, JavaScript wasn't that big in the server side of things, Node has come out
and this has enabled JavaScript powered application servers to pop up all over the place.
#3 Three. Both have libraries and frameworks. Libraries and frameworks help programmers by providing access
to general and purpose specific code that can be reused over and over again.
And both Java and JavaScript are mature enough to have a wide range of libraries and framework options
available.
#4 Four. The next thing worth mentioning is Two-Stage vs Runtime only debugging.  Java is compiled before it can
be run,
so if there are any structural problems with the code, they become apparent very quickly. And once it's running,
IDE's often enable the developer to attach to the JVM to debug in real time.
And remember, JavaScript is not compiled in the same way, so all bugs are found only at runtime. The debugging
capabilities of JavaScript a highly dependent on the execution environment, and this can vary quite a
bit.
#5 Five. Write once, run everywhere vs Branching madness.
What do I mean by this? Well, Java is specifically designed to enable developers to write code once and
deploy it in the operating system without making changes.
And in general, this does work as designed
although sometimes there are hiccups depending on the JVM and the code used.
And let's turn to JavaScript.
Although JavaScript has a standard through ECMAScript, it is much more susceptible to the differences
in execution environments
normally in the form of different browsers.
And while it's frustrating for developers to write JavaScript code for different environments,
one silver lining is that the program itself can query the environment to decide what branch of code
to run for that specific environment.
#6 Six. Static vs Dynamic Type checking. Java uses static type checking, where the type of a variable
is checked at compile time. So you as a programmer must specify the type, integer, double string,
etc. of any variable
you create. JavaScript though, uses dynamic typing.
So what this means is that it's not required for you and I to specify the type of variable we're creating.
There are many pros and cons for the two differences between how Java does it and how JavaScript does it.
But the primary advantage of static type checking right, this is Java, is that type errors are caught
early in the development. And because the compiler knows exactly what data types are being used,
code typically executes faster or/and uses less memory.
But the quid pro quo is that the primary advantage of JavaScript, of dynamic type checking, is programmer
productivity.
You and I are free to design types at our leisure.
We can work quickly and get the code out there.